# Prosper Loan Explorative Analysis
## by Banji R. Owabumoye


## Dataset
The acquired Prosper loan dataset originally comprised of 81 variables and 113,937 rows. After studying the variables and determining on goals and objectives of the project, about 19 variables were selected from the 81 variables. Some variables were transformed and additional variables were derived from some variables. At the end, 26 variables were used for analyses. After assessing and cleaninng; removing null or missing values from the dataset, rows of the dataset reduced to 83,520. That is approximately 27% reduction. 


## Summary of Findings

The time series analyses revealed that isted borrowers maintained an upward trend from year 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and got to the peak in 2013. The unusual decline recorded in 2014 is due to the fact that the dataset lastest date was March, 2014.In relation to months, Prosper is quite busier listing borrowers in September, October, November, and December than other months, most especially in the month of April. Monday and Tuesday recorded the highest number of listed borrowers, and the trend moved downward gently to wednesday, Thursday and Friday. A sharp drop was recorded on Saturday and Sunday.

Listed borrowers are evenly distributed accross USA. Highest number of borrowers came from California in Far West, followed by New York almost in the Far East, Texas located in Southwest, Florida found at the horn in Southeast, and Illinois located around the Great Lakes.

The income categories are  'No-income', 'Very-low', 'Low', 'High' and Very-high' income categories. Borrowers that are in the categories of 'Low'(25,000-49,999 Dollars) and 'Average'(50,000-74,999 Dollars) are more than other categories. Pertaining to employment status, borrower that is employed on full-time has a very high chance to be listed, followed by those that are self-employed. 'Not-employed', 'Retired' and 'Part-time' have lesser chance.

Loan term is anothe important findings. Borrowers that applied for loan facility of 36 months (3 years) are more likely to be considered compared to short term loan of 12 months (1 year) or long term loan of 60 months (5 years).

Prosper rating ranges from the lowest to the highest (HR, E, D, C, B, A, AA) most borrowers are rated C followed by B, D, and A. Prosper risk score determines how risky a loan application is, which is dependent on the loan applicant. Prosper risk score ranges from highest risk (1.0) through lowest risk (11.0). Most borrowers are scored from 4.0 through 8.0.

Borrowers' income range varies. Most borrowers are earning around $5,000, that is between $2,000 and $10,000. This income range is inline with 'Low' and 'Average income categories. The amount of most loan given was around 5,000 dollars followed by $15,000, and $10,000. These amounts of loan match perfectly with borrowers in the income category of 'Low' and 'Average' This implies that loan application with very low or very high amount might not scale through. Most amount delinquent is between $1,000 and $100,000. This amounts correspond with distribution of stated monthly income and income categories of borrowers.

Analysis on investors showed that most loans are sponsored by just one investor. Also, there are some loans sponsored by investors around 100. It can be deduced that borrowers that need small amount of loan can easily get it because there are handful number of investors that can sponsor such loans.

Looking at analysis between two variables, borrowerAPR is highly correlated with borrowerRate on each loan taken from Prosper. It is the borrower's interest rate that is used to calculate borrower's annual percentage rate. Also, correlation coefficient (r) captures negative linear relationships between Borrower Annual  Percent Rate and Loan Original Amount, Borrower Rate and Loan Original Amount. This means that an increase in Loan Original Amount, will result to a decrease in Borrower Annual Percent Rate and Borrower Rate.

Concerning investors, there is a positive relationship between Prosper Score and Investors. The higher the Prosper Score, the higher the number of investors. Likewisely, Investors and Loan Original Amount are positively correlated. The higher the loan amount the higher the number of investors that will fund the loan. 

IncomeCategory by ProsperScore showed that ProsperScore is highly influenced by incomeCategory of borrowers. The average borrowers that belongs to No-income, very-low, and low IncomeCategory are scored low while their counterparts in the IncomeCategory of average, high and very-high are scored high. BorrowerAPR which has to do with borrower annualy percent rate is negatively affecting borrowers with no-income or low income. The higher the IncomeCategory of a borrower, the lower the annual percent rate collected from such borrower.

Pertaining to ProsperRating(Alpha) and LoanOriginalAmount; the lowly rated borrowers with HR and E ratings mostly acquire loan around $5,000. Compared to other borrowers rated higher. Borrowers with D, C, B, A, and AA ratings have their average population acquiring loan around $7,500 upward. IncomeCategory and LoanOriginal also revealed that borrowers within the category of no-income, and very_low can usually access loan amount around $5,000. Meanwhile the average population of borrowers within the income category of low, average, high, and very-high can access as high as $10,000, $20,000, $25,000 and $30,000 respectively. ProsperRating(Alpha) and Investors are also insightful. The lowest rated borrowers (HR) hardly registered 1 investor solely taking the risk to invest in borrowers rated so low. Most investors investing in borrowers rated so low are around 50 - 100 investors. Compared to borrowers rated E, D, C, B, A, and AA that have many sole investors that could take the risk of investing just because of ProsperRating.

There is clear demarcation in ProsperRating(Alpha) in relation to home owners. Lowly rated borrowers from HR, E to D showed a distinct pattern different from averagely or highly rated borrowers from C, B, A, to AA. Among the lowly rated borrowers, borrowers that are not home owners are more than borrowers that own home. Inversely, more borrowers from the averagely to the highly rated own homes. This insight might be a reflection of income class of the borrowers. In order to confirm this, distribution of home owners in relation to income categories was examined. Most borrowers categorized as No-income, Very-low, and low are not home owners. Meanwhile most borrowers categorized as Average, High, and Very-high own home. 

It is amazing to realise that states with highest number of investors are concentrated in western and eastern part of USA. Texas is located in the Southwestern part of the country, Pennsylvania in Mideast, New Jersey in Mideast as well, California in Far West, District of Columba in Mideast, Connecticut in New England region are the states with highest number of investors. This pattern is quite different from distribution of borrowers from state analysed in the univariate section. 

Results from analysing three variables revealed that borrower with the highest monthly income that also qualifies to belong to very-high class in terms of income category has the lowest prosper rating. The trend is maintained for the three lowest rate categories according to ProsperRating(Alpha). It is also worthy to note that those borrowers classified as 'No-income' in 'IncomeCategory' but rated from D, C, B, A, and AA in 'ProsperRating(Alpha)', received more loan amount on the average than borrowers that belong to 'Very-low' and 'Low' in the 'IncomeCategory'. Now on loan delinquent, he lowest rated borrowers according to 'ProsperRating(Alpha)' recorded the highest amount of loan delinquent. Just that borrowers rated second lowest recorded more loan delinquent than the lowest rated borrowers.

Borrowers in the employment status categories from 'Employed', 'Full-time', Self-employed', to 'Not employed' were mostly given loan around $5,000 and these loans were short-term (12 months) and mid-term (36 months loan). Borrowers that are 'Retired', and 'Part-time' recorded no or little short-term loan. Long-term loans of 60 months around $10,000 to $40,000 were mostly offered to borrowers that are 'Employed' or/and 'Full-time'. This analysis has shown that employment status of borrowers as impact on amount of loan and loan term.


## Key Insights for Presentation

It was amazing to realise that borrowers are likely to be listed on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays respectively than Saturdays and Sundays despite that Prosper loan is an online platform. Also, Income category, employment status, monthly income and amount delinquent all contribute to Prosper score and Prosper rating which are determinant factors affecting loan's outcome status.

Loan amount approved to borrowers varies and are majorly based on Prosper rating, income range or category, and employment status of borrower. Loan amount approved to borrower is determinant factor affecting borrower rate and borrower annual percent rate. loan amount also influences payment duration or term of loan. Small loan amount are 12 months while 36 months is for mid range loan amount and lastly, loan amount that is high is attached to 60 months term.

Investors' decision are majorly influenced by Prosper score, prosper rating followed by employment status of borrower and loan amount. Most of the investors prefer to invest in loan amount around 5,000 dollars, also most investors prefer to invest in loans that has 36 months term. Borrowers that are employed on full time are the first choice of investors compared to borrowers that are retired or engaged in part-time job.
